Welcome back everyone to this lecture series on timestamps and extract functionality.
In part one.
We're going to focus on displaying current time information so as I just mentioned in this lecture we're
going to be going over a few commands and functions that report back time and date information.
Something to keep in mind is that these functions will be more useful when we're creating our own tables
and databases rather than when we're just querying a database.
We're going to be learning about creating our own tables and databases later on in the course.
But it makes sense to learn about a few commands and data types.
Right now so we've already seen in our tables that post graphs equal can hold date and time information.
For example we saw that timestamp data type column for things like when a customer actually rented a
DVD.
Now keep in mind there's actually different subsets of data types that refer to things like storing
time information or date information and the four main ones are the time data type which contains only
time such as hours minutes and seconds.
Then there's the date data type which contains only a date the month day and year.
And then there's timestamp which essentially combines both of those and contains both date information
and time information and there's timestamp T.C. or timestamp Time Zone which contains date time and
time zone information something to keep in mind.
And we'll talk about this later on when we're learning about creating our own tables and databases is.
You should have or perform careful considerations when designing a table and database and choosing a
time data type.
Keep in mind depending on the situation you may or may not need the full level of dates times and time
zones.
For example if you're designing a table that will calculate how many hours people worked you may actually
just need time information the time they clocked in and then the time they clock out especially if Each
row represents a work shift.
There's no point in keeping track of time zone because you don't expect this person to be changing time
zones and one shift of work.
Now something to critically remember is if you are keeping track of historical time information or date
information or timestamp information and you're trying to perform some sort of calculation like maybe
how many days worked or something of that nature you can always remove historical information.
For example if you're keeping track of time stamp tizzy and later on you discover you don't actually
need time zone information.
You can always remove that times when information but what you cannot do is go back and add it in because
you were never recording it in the first place.
So that's really the careful consideration to make is that if you're recording time or date information
and you decide later on that you wanted to go back and also record time zone information because maybe
your company expanded globally you can't actually just make that information pop out of nowhere.
So you should always have that careful consideration and try to think long term when choosing a particular
time data type now if that being said I want to just quickly explore a couple of functions and operations
related to these specific data types and those are our time zone.
Now time of day current time and current date and as I mentioned these are more useful when we're creating
tables or having a table automatically populate entries based off when something is actually created
like what time is this row actually being created.
So we're going quickly go over these and don't expect them to be super useful for queries but later
on we'll encounter some of these functions.
They're pretty self-explanatory so I'm just going to head straight to PGI admin and work through a few
examples.
OK.
Here I am and post press sequel and I've connected to my DVD rental database.
Now let's first show you had actually understand and grab what is your current time zone that you're
working in and the way we do that is with the show command.
And we haven't actually seen this before.
Keep in mind I'm not going to do select I'm going to do show and the main command.
People can use of show is show all.
And if you check out the documentation for Postgres sequel on show it shows the values of a bunch of
runtime parameters.
And there's a list of parameters here and you can scroll down and view more information on them.
But if you just say show all and then run this query go ahead and run that.
You'll notice there's a name of a parameter the setting it's currently on and then a description text
basically telling you and explaining what that name and setting refer to.
So for example my current application is PGI admin for.
And if I keep expanding on this they'll tell me what actual connection I'm on.
And if you scroll down there's actually about 300 different parameters you can see here.
And so one of them you can check out quickly is time zone go ahead and run that and you can see here
that on the computer I'm working on that my current time zone is U.S. Eastern.
OK.
So let's I can figure out what time zone you're working with now if you actually want to get the current
timestamp and recall timestamp includes both date and time information.
Here we come back and we'll say select.
And then we're going to call the now function.
So it's now open and closed parentheses which basically just says Give me the timestamp information
for right now.
And and once you run that you'll be able to see that you get a timestamp with a time zone set of information
so you can see the dates and then the time as well as information concerning what actual time zone you're
in based off standard GMT which stands for Greenwich Mean Time and you can just do a quick google search
on that which is basically just an international way of marking what time zone you're in.
So you can you select now to get your current timestamp one thing to notice is that this gives it to
you in kind of timestamp format which is sometimes a little hard to read if you want to as a string
you can say select time of day open and close parentheses run that.
And this returns back basically the same information but as a string labeling it Thursday March 19th
and then time and then the year as well as the time zone.
So a little easier to read and possibly a little easier to store and grab components from because it's
just a text string with that information.
It's actually no longer a specific time stamp style.
And then finally the last two commands are basically subsets of this instead of grabbing the current
timestamp.
You can just grab just the current time which should be select current time run that that gives you
just the time with time zone or you could change it to current dates run that and that basically just
gives you the current dates.
Okay.
So now we know how to grab the time zone information the full timestamp with now functionality and then
how to grab the time of day which is this string representation of the timestamp that it currently is.
And then how to grab current dates and current time subcomponents of that this would be a lot more important
when we're creating different rows and tables and then trying to log stuff of when it was actually created.
We won't typically be asking for what the current date is which sequel just like this.
Instead just use your clock.
OK.
So coming up next we're going to focus on timestamp functionality that's related to querying tables
and databases.
So I will see you there in the next lecture.